The safety center you see on the door here is kind of
an interesting thing. I got involved in the
chemical process safety area, I guess, about four
years ago. A fellow who is now retired used to be
head of the safety engineering program in
industrial engineering, Ralph Vernon. I don't
know if you knew that. I think I do. That's been a
really good program, hasn't it? Well, it's kind of
ironic because it wasn't. an independent degree
program. And then they kind of downgraded it just
to an option in the IE program. And then they
transferred it to nuclear engineering because
they had a radiological safety program there. So
they combined it with that. So it's been kind of
disbursed over the recent years. They still have
some IE people teaching some undergraduate
courses, but the graduate program is centered in
nuclear engineering. But there's been a market
for those kind of people, hasn't there? There has
been a demand. And Ralph, back in about four years
ago, had, and I don't know how he got it, but he got a
contract with Pertamina Oil Company in Indonesia
for teaching a safety program to 24 Indonesian
engineers. This is a 10-week program in the
summertime. And he was looking for help. And I'd
known Ralph for a while. We always talked
informally and stuff. So he told me about it. And
about that time, there was a book, a new book that
came out. The chemical engineering program was
emphasizing process safety. And the AICHE was
pushing this. They have a center for chemical
process safety and all of that. And there was a book
that came out on that subject. And I was interested
in the book. So I volunteered. to teach chemical
process safety to these Indonesian engineers. So
I helped Ralph teach these guys. And I set up some
field trips for them to different companies
around. And I went through that whole book. And I
saw that this was a really significant, important
topic in the profession and in the industry. So I
put it in as an elective course. It took me about two
or three years to get it in, because at the time,
Blumefeld was head of the department. And we were
kind of in a bind to meet our required teaching
loads with our required courses. So he wasn't
inclined to add another elective course. So he
first told me that I couldn't teach it unless I
thought it was an overload. But I volunteered to
teach it as an overload. That's a nice offer, isn't
it? Yeah. But you did. You did do it. I did. I taught
it as an overload the first time. And it went over
pretty well. So we put it in as a permanent course.
And then about a year later, I got this letter in the
mail from a lawyer in Houston who said he had a
client who he couldn't name, but he was interested
in supporting an educational program across the
state, wanted to know what we had going. So I wrote
him. I responded. I told him what I was doing in the
course and something about the safety program
here and all of that. And I didn't get a response, so
I forgot about it. And about a year later, Then I got
another letter saying that Mr. T. Michael
O'Connor would like to set up his endowed program
here at A&M. And T. Michael O'Connor is not the one
who's on the Board of Regents. We have a T. Michael
O'Connor on the Regents, but this is another
fellow who was a chemical engineering graduate
from the University of Missouri at Rolla. And his
wife is also a chemical engineering graduate from
the University of Missouri at Columbia. And he was
working for Kellogg at the time. And his wife was
working for Phillips. And she was killed in the
Phillips explosion in Pasadena in 1989. And there
was 23 people killed in that explosion. And most of
them participated in the class action lawsuit
against Phillips. But Mike O'Connor didn't.
Being a chem engineer, he did extra homework to
find out what went wrong and what they couldn't do
right and all of that. and he filed his own
independent lawsuit. That's why the lawyer
couldn't tell me who it was in the beginning,
because the lawsuit was still pending. Well, it
ended up that he got a $40 million settlement from
that lawsuit, and he dedicated $4 million of that
to education and process safety, which he put
aside in a private foundation. And the proceeds
are now coming to us here. The money that's
generated by the interest from that endowment is
coming here to support the program. But this is
good and bad. It's obviously good to have this
resource. The bad part about it is that process
safety is not a traditional research area for
chemical engineering. It's much more applied.
It's industrial oriented. In fact, I just served
as the chairman for a plant process safety
symposium sponsored by AICH in Houston on the 1st
of April. We had over 500 attendees, 30 technical
sessions, a bunch of exhibitors. I think I was the
only academic involved in the whole meeting. The
rest of them were industrial people from all over
the world, but they were all industrial people.
I'm sure with environmental law and safety law,
they're in liability and all that stuff. It's a
very hot area in the industry, but there's no
programs in NSF to support it. So it's not easy
getting funding support from traditional
research support areas. But we recently have
gotten a grant from the Design Institute for
Emergency Relief Systems, which is an informal
industrial group sponsored by the AICHE that's
dedicated to developing design procedures for
emergency relief pressure vessels. And a lot of
these pressure vessels are chemical reactors
that, when the reaction takes off and runs away,
then stuff comes out to the leak lane. And you have
to be able to design these things to properly size
them to handle the flow rates so the pressure
doesn't run beyond the second level. Nobody knows
how to do this properly because, you know, this is
an unsteady state, multi-phase,
non-isothermal, you know, a very complicated
system that these things take on. And so the design
institute had actually put together a design
manual and a computer program for doing this, and
they made some money from that. And so they put out
some RFPs, request for proposals for research,
for high-viscosity, multi-phase flows through
the leaf systems. So meanwhile, I had, with some of
the contacts I made through this symposium,
another fellow who was president of the South
Texas AICHE interested in this area, who's
actually also chairman of the Chemical
Engineering Advisory Committee for Prairie
View, as a matter of fact. They've been trying to
push Prairie View to get involved in research in
this area. And then I came on the same, and it was
obvious I had direct interest in this area so i
teamed up with them and five or six companies and we
competed for this grant from this naira institute
apparently they've
been there as long as i've been here yeah it's had a
very spotty history up and down a lot of changes in
personnel and administration It's not been too
stable over the years, but it's been there. And I
think it's getting better, but it still has a ways
to go. They don't have much of a graduate program.
They do have some master's students. So myself and
a fellow in mechanical engineering, a fellow
who's head in Prairie View, two companies that
have test facilities that make these relief
valves and testing and evaluating are in a
consortium group that we did on this contract, and
we got it. And so we're now getting started to that.
And Dr. Patrick has been officially signed with
NASA. The only project I have to complain about is
the Hilton Johnson Space Center. And NASA has a...
term, and it's not human engineering, but anyway,
it has to do with safety and adaptation of systems
first. The human... They call it ergonomics. Part
of that, like a chair, an ergonomic chair. They're
really conscious of that. Because, of course, in
that, safety... preservation and duplicate
systems and self-redundant systems and what have
you. One of the problems I have when I say process
safety, we have the safety engineering program
here at A&M already, which really is basically
industrial hygiene things. Industrial hygiene
is more personnel safety, protection from
hazardous environment and that sort of thing,
whereas process safety is how to make the plants
and processes and equipment safe. So there's a lot
more engineering design involved, like sizing
these relief valves. And the government
guidelines now require, OSHA and EPA guidelines
require all companies that handle certain
amounts of any hazardous material to have not only
training programs, but they have to estimate what
happens, scenarios, if pipes would break or
vessels would rupture, how much of this stuff
would be released, at what rate, where it would go,
what would be the concentrations and the
consequences and the effects, so vapor cloud
dispersion modeling, release rates, relief
systems, all of that, and how to design processes
that are inherently safer using less severe
conditions, less negative materials and things
like that. This is all process safety. In fact,
AICHE has the Center for Chemical Process Safety,
which in turn has a national committee whose
objective is to integrate process safety topics
into the chemical engineering curriculum. And
I'm a member of that committee. And all of us are
developing teaching modules that incorporate
various process safety topics in process control
and committees and fluid mechanics and
stoichiometry and all those. It looks like all
those blue books on the shelf behind you
are examples of these teaching modules that we've
developed. Would you say most of your students
that you've been here go into refining,
protein-related industries? Well,
historically, the petrochemical industry has
been the main employee of the chemical engineers.
But that's gradually shifting. In fact, in the
early 80s, we had a downturn in employment
petrochemical industry. At that time, a lot of
them were taken up by companies like pulp and paper
companies or foods and pharmaceuticals and that.
In recent times, a very hot area has been
electronic processing, making solid state
wafers, silicon wafers, and IC circuits. There's
a lot of chemical processes not only involved with
making the wafers, but actually making the
circuits by etching and diffusion and things like
that, which are chemical processes. So those
companies finally realized that chemical
engineers know a lot and can benefit from it. Good.
That's good. Well, Ron, I don't want to keep you any
longer today, since we've done a lot. But I'd like
to come back at you, possibly, sometime. I'm going
to take my time doing this. Could I get from you, you
have to have a copy of your vita sometimes. Do you
have any information on the safety processing
brochure or something? Let me see you all. Thank
you very much.